Add schema migration guide, reorder and rename in places (#6656)
edgedb/edgedb: docs/guides/migrations/guide.rst

person's house, it doesn't *do* anything on its own, and neither does 
the SDL in your ``default.esdl`` file. With SDL you are declaring 
what you want the final result to be: a schema containing a single 
type called ``User``, with a property of type ``str`` called ``name``.

In order for a migration to happen, the EdgeDB server needs to receive 
DDL statements telling it what changes to make, in the exact same 
way that you give instructions like "turn right at the next intersection" 
to your friend who is trying to find your house. In EdgeDB's case, 
these commands will start with words like ``create`` and ``drop`` 
and ``alter`` to tell it what changes to make. EdgeDB accomplishes 
these changes by knowing how to turn your declarative SDL into a schema 
migration file that contains the DDL statements to accomplish the 
necessary changes.

DDL: For computers (mostly)
===========================

To see what a schema migration file looks like, type ``edgedb migration 
create`` and then hit ``y`` to say yes to the question you see below:

.. code-block::

    db> did you create object type 'default::User'? [y,n,l,c,b,s,q,?]

>     > y

Author: True. Added an explanation: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/c1abca92aaf128f2e9ab27881d4e173f6c6d8d6e

meaning "giving orders"), namely commands telling the database how 
to get from the current state to the desired state. Note that, in 
contrast to SDL, this code says nothing about the current schema or 
its final state. This command would work with the schema of any database 
at all that doesn't already have a type called ``User``.

Let's try one more small migration, in which we decided that we don't 
want the ``name`` property anymore. Once again, we are declaring the 
final state: a ``User`` type with nothing inside.

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
      type User;
    }

As before, typing ``edgedb migration create`` will create a DDL statement 
to change it from the current state to the one we have declared. This 
time we aren't starting from a blank schema, so the difference between 
SDL and DDL is even clearer. The DDL statement alone doesn't give 
us any indication what the schema looks like; all anyone could know 
from this migration script alone is that there is a ``User`` type 
inside a module called ``default`` that *doesn't* have a property 
called ``name`` anymore.

.. code-block::

  ALTER TYPE default::User {
      DROP PROPERTY name;
  };

> 

Author: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/79862688c02a51ea5b6d6a8189c865b1664ef1a3

.. note::

>     Migrations (and other commands) take even less time if you are 

Author: Ah, now that I think about it the difference is pretty negligible...if you're not using Windows. On Windows (outside of WSL) the difference is pretty huge (a few seconds vs. instantaneous) so I almost exclusively do migrations while connected. So I'll incorporate the suggestion but change the last sentence a bit.

>     Migrations (and other commands) take even less time if you are 

Author: Rewrote to this: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/b5fd29cb734238debf9c98fc5ebea6abfb5ff39b

as readable as the SDL in your schema.

If we type ``describe schema as sdl;`` then we'll see the SDL version 
of the DDL above: a declarative schema as opposed to statements.

.. code-block:: sdl

  module default {
    type User;
  };

Now let's add the new scalar type mentioned above and give it to the 
``User`` type. Our schema will now look like this:

.. code-block:: sdl-diff

      module default {
        type User {
    +     name: Name;
        }
    +   scalar type Name extending str;
      }

Note that we are able to put the ``scalar type Name`` below the ``User`` 
type, because order doesn't matter in SDL. Let's migrate to this new 
schema and then use ``describe schema;`` again. The output shows us 
that the database has gone in the necessary order to make the schema: 
first it creates the module, then a scalar type called ``Name``, and 
finally the ``User`` type which is now able to have a property of 
type ``Name``.

.. code-block::

    create module default if not exists;
    create scalar type default::Name extending std::str;
    create type default::User {
        create property name: default::Name;

>     };

Author: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/9d4a07637204e79acc300dac3771cdcb409e14f7

The output with ``describe schema as sdl;`` is also somewhat similar. 
It's SDL, but the order matches that of the DDL statements.

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
        scalar type Name extending std::str;
        type User {
            property name: default::Name;
        };
    };

So the schema produced with ``describe schema as sdl;`` may not match 
the schema you've written inside ``default.esdl``, and it will also 
show you the order in which statements were needed to reach this final 
layout.

Non-interactive migrations
--------------------------

Now let's move back to the most basic schema with a single type that 
has no properties.

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
      type SomeType;
    }

Creating a migration with ``edgedb migration create`` will result 
in two questions, one to confirm that we wanted to drop the ``name`` 

> property, and another to drop the ``Name`` type.

Author: Good catch, definitely should be User. https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/b973f9a0f697493dd14d6f10263e4088739723a5

    > y

This didn't take very long, but you can imagine that it could get 
annoying if we had decided to drop ten or more types or properties 
and had to say yes to every change. In a case like this, we can use 
a non-interactive migration. Let's give that a try.

First go into your ``/dbschema/migrations`` folder and delete the 
most recent ``.edgeql`` file that drops the property ``name`` and 
the scalar type ``Name``. Don't worry - the migration hasn't been 
applied yet, so you won't confuse the database by deleting it at this 
point. And now type ``edgedb migration create --non-interactive``.

You'll see the same file generated, except that this time there weren't 
any questions to answer. A non-interactive migration will work as 
long as the database has a high degree of confidence about every change 
made, and will fail otherwise.

A non-interactive migration will fail if we make changes to our schema 
that are ambiguous. Let's see if we can make a non-interactive migration 
fail by doing just that. Delete the most recent ``.edgeql`` migration 
file again, and change the schema to this:

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
      type User {

>         nam: Name;

Author: I originally considered that but it's just changing a name by a letter and (unless there is a way to show a diff of a single letter) that would take a bit longer to parse, I think. In the meantime I've opted for a quick "Can you spot the difference?" before the code block to get the reader's attention. https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/0b2663eca415758c93e23bc78b7903ce7976b8b7

      }
      scalar type Name extending str;
    }

The only difference from the current schema is that we would like 
to change the property name ``name`` to ``nam``.

But this time EdgeDB isn't sure what change we wanted to make. Did 
we intend to:

- Change ``name`` to ``nam`` and keep the existing data?
- Drop ``name`` and create a new property called ``nam``?
- Do something else?

So this time the non-interactive migration will fail, with some pretty 
nice output:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> \migration create --non-interactive
    EdgeDB intended to apply the following migration:
        ALTER TYPE default::User {
            ALTER PROPERTY name {
                RENAME TO nam;
            };
        };
    But confidence is 0.67, below minimum threshold of 0.99999
    Error executing command: EdgeDB is unable to make a decision.

    Please run in interactive mode to confirm changes, or use
    `--allow-unsafe`

> As the output suggests, you can add ``allow-unsafe`` to a non-interactive 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the output suggests, you can add ``--allow-unsafe`` to a non-interactive 
```

migration if you truly want to push the suggestions through regardless 

> of the migration tool's confidence. But it's more likely in this case 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the migration tool's confidence, but it's more likely in this case 
```

that you would like to interact with the CLI's questions to help it 
make a decision. For example, if we had intended to drop the property 
``name`` and create a new property ``nam``, we would simply answer 
``n`` when it asks us if we intended to *rename* the property. It 
then confirms that we are altering the ``User`` type, and finishes 
the migration script.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> \migration create
    did you rename property 'name' of object type 'default::User' 
    to 'nam'? [y,n,l,c,b,s,q,?]
    > n
    did you alter object type 'default::User'? [y,n,l,c,b,s,q,?]
    > y

Afterwards, you can go into the ``.edgeql`` file that was just created 
to confirm that these were the changes we wanted to make. It will 
look like this:

.. code-block::

    CREATE MIGRATION m15hu2pbez5od7fe3shlxwcprbqhvctnfavadccjgjszboy26grgka
        ONTO m17m6qjjhtslfkqojvjb4g2vqtzasv5mlbtrqbp6mhwlzv57p5f2uq
    {
      ALTER TYPE default::User {
        CREATE PROPERTY nam: default::Name;
        DROP PROPERTY name;
      };
    };

.. note::

>     See the section below on migration hashes if you are curious about 

Reviewer: We should add a label to the section we're referencing and link the phrase "migration hashes" to it.

Reviewer: I think linking "the section below" is not as nice for accessibility. One mode of traversing the page with a screen reader is to read only the text of each link and allow the user to click on any of the links. "The section below" would not indicate to a screen reader user what they are navigating to. Relative position of the section on the page isn't as meaningful as what the section is about would be, IMO.

Author: True! Pretty long link but got it within the line length limit: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/commit/ca7203dadef82941680f11cc887c25c00d997cb3

>     how migrations are named)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    how migrations are named.
```

> So the ``User`` type was altered via creating a new property, and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This migration will alter the ``User`` type by creating a new property and 
```

dropping the old one. If that is what we wanted, then we can now type 

> ``edgedb migrate`` to complete the migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``\migrate`` in the REPL or ``edgedb migrate`` at the command line to complete the migration.
```
Leading with the REPL command since this is what you used in the previous step.

Questions from the CLI
======================

> So far we've only learned how to say yes or no to the CLI's questions 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far we've only learned how to say "yes" or "no" to the CLI's questions 
```

when we migrate a schema, but quite a few other options are presented 
when the CLI asks us a question:

.. code-block::

    did you create object type 'default::PlayerCharacter'? [y,n,l,c,b,s,q,?]
    > y

> The choices ``y`` and ``n`` are obviously yes and no, and you can 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The choices ``y`` and ``n`` are obviously "yes" and "no," and you can 
```

probably guess that ``?`` will pull up a help menu, but the others 
aren't so clear. Let's go over every option to make sure we understand 
them.

``y`` (or ``yes``)
------------------

This will accept the proposed change and move on to the next step. 

> If it's the last proposed change, the migration will now be complete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it's the last proposed change, the migration will now be created.
```

``n`` (or ``no``)
-----------------

This will reject the proposed change. At this point, the migration 
tool will try to suggest a different change if it can, but it won't 
always be able to do so.
 
We can see this behavior with the same tiny schema change we made 
above where we changed a property name from ``name`` to ``nam``. In 

> the output below, we see the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the output of that ``migration create``, we see the following:
```

> - The CLI first asks us if we renamed the property, to which we say no.
> - It then tries to confirm that we have altered the ``User`` type. 
>   We say no again. 
> - The CLI then guesses that maybe we are dropping and creating the 
>   whole ``User`` type instead. This time, we say yes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The CLI first asks us if we renamed the property, to which we say "no".
- It then tries to confirm that we have altered the ``User`` type. 
  We say "no" again. 
- The CLI then guesses that maybe we are dropping and creating the 
  whole ``User`` type instead. This time, we say "yes."
```

- It then asks us to confirm that we are creating a ``User`` type, 
  since we have decided to drop the existing one.

> But if we say no again to this question, the CLI will throw its hands 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we say "no" again to the final question, the CLI will throw its hands 
```

up and tell us that it doesn't know what we are trying to do because 
there is no way left for it to migrate to the schema that we have 
told it to move to.

> Here is the output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is what that would look like:
```

.. code-block::

    did you rename property 'name' of object type 'default::User' 
    to 'nam'?
    [y,n,l,c,b,s,q,?]
    > n
    did you alter object type 'default::User'? [y,n,l,c,b,s,q,?]
    > n
    did you drop object type 'default::User'? [y,n,l,c,b,s,q,?]
    > y
    did you create object type 'default::User'? [y,n,l,c,b,s,q,?]
    > n
    Error executing command: EdgeDB could not resolve migration with 
    the provided answers. Please retry with different answers.

``l`` (or ``list``)
-------------------

This is used to see (list) the actual DDL statements that are being proposed.
When asked the question ``did you alter object type 'default::User'?``
in the example above, we might be wondering exactly what changes will 
be made here. How exactly does the database intend to alter the ``User`` 

> type if we say yes? Simply clicking ``l`` will show it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type if we say "yes?" Simply pressing ``l`` will show it:
```

.. code-block::

    The following DDL statements will be applied:
      ALTER TYPE default::User {
          CREATE PROPERTY nam: std::str;
          DROP PROPERTY name;
      };

> This shows us clear as day that saying ``yes`` will result in creating 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This shows us clear as day that saying "yes" will result in creating 
```

It looks like in most instances up to now, you're not styling "yes" as inline code, which I think is correct since the actual response is simply `y`. I've made this match those other instances but also surrounded it with quotes to reflect this is our reply like I have with the others.

a new property called ``nam`` and dropping the existing ``name`` property.

> So when doubts dwell, click the letter l!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So when doubts dwell, press the letter "l!"
```
I dig the mnemonic!

Author: Ha! I couldn't resist throwing it in.

``c`` (or ``confirmed``)
------------------------

This simply shows the entire list of statements that have been confirmed. 
In other words, this is the migration as it stands at this point.

``b`` (or ``back``)
-------------------

This will undo the last confirmation you agreed to and move you back 
a step in the migration. If you haven't confirmed any statements yet, 
a message will simply appear to let you know that there is nowhere 
further back to move to. So pressing ``b`` will never abort a migration.

The following two keys will stop the migration, but in different ways:

``s`` (or ``stop``)
-------------------

This is also known as a 'split'. Pressing ``s`` will complete the 
migration at the current point. Any statements that you have applied 
will be applied, but the schema will not yet match the schema in your 

> ``.esdl`` file(s). But you can easily start another migration to complete 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``.esdl`` file(s). You can easily start another migration to complete 
```

the remaining changes once you have applied the migration that was 
just created. This effectively splits the migration into two or more 
files.

``q`` (or ``quit``)
-------------------

Pressing ``q`` will simply quit without saving any of your progress.

> Migration hashes and data migrations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data migrations and migration hashes
```
Changing the order to reflect the order they're discussed.

====================================

Sometimes you may want to initialize a database with some default 
data, or add some data to a migration that you have just created before 
you apply it.

EdgeDB assumes by default that a migration involves a change to your 
schema, so it won't create a migration for you if it doesn't see a 
schema change:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ edgedb migration create
    No schema changes detected.

So how do you create a migration with only data? To do this, just 
add ``--allow-empty`` to the command:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ edgedb migration create --allow-empty
    Created myproject/dbschema/migrations/00002.edgeql,
    id: m1xseswmheqzxutr55cu66ko4oracannpddujg7gkna2zsjpqm2g3a

> You will now see an empty migration in which you can enter some queries. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will now see an empty migration in ``dbschema/migrations`` in which you can enter some queries. 
```

It will look something like this:

.. code-block::

    CREATE MIGRATION m1xseswmheqzxutr55cu66ko4oracannpddujg7gkna2zsjpqm2g3a
        ONTO m1n5lfw7n74626cverbjwdhcafnhmbezjhwec2rbt46gh3ztoo7mqa
    {
    };

You can now add your queries inside the braces. Assuming a schema 

> with a simple ``User`` type, we could then add a bunch of queries 

Reviewer: Rather than showing this way to add the data migrations and manually update the hash, should we demonstrate [`edgedb migration edit`](https://www.edgedb.com/docs/cli/edgedb_migration/edgedb_migration_edit) which will open the migration in your editor and automatically update the hash for you? Then we could circle back and say that, if you had edited the migration directly instead, you would have gotten this error and could manually update the hash.

Author: Good idea. Interestingly I recently added migration edit to Windows but didn't know that it also updated the hash.

https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/commit/e7ff59dbf5b5eed95cb4600c158b0bb8eac35a4e

I've opted for a different order though as I want to walk the reader through the process first before showing the more convenient way to do it. Plus, even though `edgedb migration edit` is easier to *use*, it's still an extra item to remember when getting used to migrations in the first place whereas everyone knows how to edit a file, click save and follow the instructions in the output. So I'd still call it the more advanced concept and put it second.

such as the following:

.. code-block::

    CREATE MIGRATION m1xseswmheqzxutr55cu66ko4oracannpddujg7gkna2zsjpqm2g3a
        ONTO m1n5lfw7n74626cverbjwdhcafnhmbezjhwec2rbt46gh3ztoo7mqa
    {
        insert User { name := 'User 1'};
        insert User { name := 'User 2'};
        delete User filter .name = 'User 2';
    };

> But when you type ``edgedb migrate``, the CLI will then complain that 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem is, if you save that migration and run ``edgedb migrate``, the CLI will complain that 
```

the migration hash doesn't match what it is supposed to be. However, 
it helpfully provides the reason: "Migration names are computed from 

> the hash of the migration contents".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the hash of the migration contents."
```

Fortunately, it also tells you exactly what the hash (the migration 

> name) will need to be and you can simply change it to that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
name) will need to be, and you can simply change it to that.
```

.. code-block::

    Error executing command: could not read migrations in 
    myproject/dbschema/migrations:

    could not read migration file myproject/dbschema/migrations/00002.edgeql:

    Migration name should be:
    m13g7j2tqu23yaffv6wkn2adp6hayp76su2qtg2lutdh3mmj5xyk6q, but
    m1xseswmheqzxutr55cu66ko4oracannpddujg7gkna2zsjpqm2g3a found instead.

    Migration names are computed from the hash of the migration contents.

    To proceed you must fix the statement to read as:
    CREATE MIGRATION m13g7j2tqu23yaffv6wkn2adp6hayp76su2qtg2lutdh3mmj5xyk6q 
    ONTO ...
    Alternatively, revert the changes to the file.

> You can also create a migration that combines schema changes and data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aside from exclusive data migrations, you can also create a migration that combines schema changes *and* data. 
```

> This is even easier, since it doesn't even require appending ``allow-empty`` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is even easier, since it doesn't even require appending ``--allow-empty`` 
```

to the command. Just do the following:

> - Change your schema,
> - Type ``edgedb migration create`` and respond to the CLI's questions,
> - Add your queries to the file (best done on the bottom after the 
>   DDL statements have changed the schema),
> - Type ``edgedb migrate`` and change the migration name to the suggested name,
> - Type ``edgedb migrate`` again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Change your schema
2. Type ``edgedb migration create`` and respond to the CLI's questions
3. Add your queries to the file (best done on the bottom after the 
   DDL statements have changed the schema)
4. Type ``edgedb migrate`` and change the migration name to the suggested name
5. Type ``edgedb migrate`` again
```
Changing to an ordered list since order is important here. Also ditching the commas since a series is implied by the list.

The `EdgeDB tutorial <tutorial_>`_ is a good example of a database 
set up with both a schema migration and a data migration. Setting 

> up a database with schema changes in one file and default data in 
> a second file is a nice way to separate the two operations and maintain 
> high readability at the same time. These two files can be `seen here 
> <tutorial_files_>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
up a database with `schema changes in one file and default data in 
a second file <tutorial_files_>`_ is a nice way to separate the two operations and maintain 
high readability at the same time.
```
Trying to make the link label more reflective of what we're linking to for accessibility.

Squashing migrations
====================

> Users often end up making frequent changes to their schema because 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users often end up making many changes to their schema because 
```
My thinking here is that it's the quantity of changes rather than the frequency that creates the need for squashing.

of how effortless it is to do. (And in the next section we will learn 

> about EdgeDB Watch, which is ever more effortless!) This leads to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
about EdgeDB Watch, which is even more effortless!) This leads to 
```

an interesting side effect: lots of ``.edgeql`` files, many of which 
represent trials and approaches that don't end up making it to the 

> final form for your schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
final schema.
```

Once you are done, you might want to squash the migrations into a 
single file. This is especially nice if you need to frequently initialize 
database instances using the same schema, because all migrations are 
applied when an instance starts up. You can imagine that the output 
would be pretty long if you had dozens and dozens of migration files 
to work through:

.. code-block::

    Initializing EdgeDB instance...
    Applying migrations...
    Applied m13brvdizqpva6icpcvmsc3fee2yt5j267uba6jugy6iugcbs2djkq 
    (00001.edgeql)
    Applied m1aildofb3gvhv3jaa5vjlre4pe26locxevqok4semmlgqwu3xayaa 
    (00002.edgeql)
    Applied m1ixxlsdgrlinfijnrbmxdicmpfav33snidudqi7fu4yfhg4nngoza 
    (00003.edgeql)
    Applied m1tsi4amrdbcfjypu72duyckrlvvyb46r3wybd7qnbmem4rjvnbcla 
    (00004.edgeql)
    ...and so on...
    Project initialized.

> To squash your migrations, just add ``--squash`` after ``edgedb migration 
> create``. Running this command will first display some helpful info 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To squash your migrations, just run ``edgedb migration create`` with the
 ``--squash`` option. Running this command will first display some helpful info 
```
"just add…" implies the user would have already been running `edgedb migration create`, but in this instance, the user would only run it if their intention was to squash since there are no outstanding schema changes to create migrations from. Reformulated to reflect this.

to keep in mind before committing to the operation:

.. code-block::

    Current database revision is: 
    m16ixoukn7ulqdn7tp6lvx2754hviopanufv2lm6wf4x2borgc3g6a
    While squashing migrations is non-destructive, 
    it may lead to manual work if done incorrectly.

    Items to check before using --squash:
    1. Ensure that `./dbschema` dir is comitted
    2. Ensure that other users of the database have the revision
    above or can create database from scratch.
        To check a specific instance, run:
        edgedb -I <name> migration log --from-db --newest-first --limit 1
    1. Merge version control branches that contain schema changes
    if possible.

    Proceed? [y/n]

> Then just press ``y`` to squash all of your existing migrations into 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Press ``y`` to squash all of your existing migrations into 
```

a single file.

Fixups during a squash
----------------------

If your schema doesn't match the schema in the database, EdgeDB will 

> prompt you to create a *fixup* file, which can be useful (as the CLI 
> says) to "automate upgrading other instances to a squashed revision". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prompt you to create a *fixup* file, which can be useful to, as the CLI 
says, "automate upgrading other instances to a squashed revision". 
```

> You'll see fixups inside a folder called ``/fixups``. Their file names 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll see fixups inside ``/dbschema/fixups``. Their file names 
```
to avoid implying fixups will appear at `fixups` from the project root

> are extremely long, but are simply two migration hashes joined together 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are extremely long because they are simply two migration hashes joined together 
```

> by a dash. So a fixup that begins with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by a dash. This means a fixup that begins with
```

.. code-block::

    CREATE MIGRATION 
    m1v3vqmwif4ml3ucbzi555mjgm4myxs2husqemopo2sz2m7otr22ka 
    ONTO m16awk2tzhtbupjrzoc4fikgw5okxpfnaazupb6rxudxwin2qfgy5q

will have a file name a full 116 characters in length.

The CLI output when using squash along with a fixup is pretty informative 
on its own, so let's just walk through the output as you'll see it 

> in practice.
> 
> First we'll begin with this schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in practice. First we'll begin with this schema:
```

Reviewer: Also, we should specify how we want the reader to follow along here. Should they start a new project or migrate the project we created earlier to this new schema?

.. code-block:: sdl

  type User {
    name: str;
  }

Then remove ``name: str;`` from the ``User`` type, migrate, put it 

> back again, and migrate. You'll now have multiple files in your

Reviewer: Maybe we can suggest "removing" it by commenting it out since this could also be a useful technique to learn.

Author: Good idea! https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/59c9dd8bd7c8fa902f56a60c1239e8a10acad8dc

``/migrations`` folder and will now be able to squash them.

> Then change to this schema without migrating it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then change to this schema **without migrating it**:
```
Just want to make sure this part gets noticed.

.. code-block:: sdl

  type User {
    name: str;
    nickname: str;
  }

> Upon using ``edgedb migration create --squash``, the output is first 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now run ``edgedb migration create --squash``. The output is first 
```
Want to make sure it's clear what the reader should do.

the same as with our previous squash:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ edgedb migration create --squash
    Current database revision: 
    m16awk2tzhtbupjrzoc4fikgw5okxpfnaazupb6rxudxwin2qfgy5q
    While squashing migrations is non-destructive, 
    it may lead to manual work if done incorrectly.

    Items to check before using --squash:
    1. Ensure that `./dbschema` dir is comitted
    2. Ensure that other users of the database have the revision
    above or can create database from scratch.
        To check a specific instance, run:
        edgedb -I <name> migration log --from-db --newest-first --limit 1
    3. Merge version control branches that contain schema changes 
    if possible.

    Proceed? [y/n]
    > y

But after typing ``y``, the CLI will notice that the existing schema 
differs from what you have and offers to make a fixup file:

.. code-block::

    Your schema differs from the last revision. 
    A fixup file can be created
    to automate upgrading other instances to a squashed revision.
    This starts the usual migration creation process.

    Feel free to skip this step if you don't have
    other instances to migrate

    Create a fixup file? [y/n]
    > y

> You will then see the the same questions that otherwise show up in 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will then see the the same questions that otherwise show up in 
```
```suggestion
You will then see the the same questions that would otherwise show up in 
```

a standard migration:

.. code-block::

    db> did you create property 'nickname' of object type 'default::User'? 
    [y,n,l,c,b,s,q,?]
    > y
    Squash is complete.

Finally, the CLI will give some advice on recommended commands when 
working with git after doing a squash with a fixup.

.. code-block::

    Remember to commit the `dbschema` directory including deleted files
    and `fixups` subdirectory. Recommended command:
        git add dbschema

    The normal migration process will update your migration history:
        edgedb migrate

> 
>     $ edgedb migrate
>     
>     Applied m1v3vqmwif4ml3ucbzi555mjgm4myxs2husqemopo2sz2m7otr22ka 
>     (m16awk2tzhtbupjrzoc4fikgw5okxpfnaazupb6rxudxwin2qfgy5q-
>     m1oih6aevfcftysukvofwuth2bsuj5aahkdnpabscry7p7ljkgbxma.edgeql)

Reviewer: I would split this code block with a quick sentence to show this is where you entered a new command.
```suggestion

We'll take its suggestion to apply the migration:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ edgedb migrate
    
    Applied m1v3vqmwif4ml3ucbzi555mjgm4myxs2husqemopo2sz2m7otr22ka 
    (m16awk2tzhtbupjrzoc4fikgw5okxpfnaazupb6rxudxwin2qfgy5q-
    m1oih6aevfcftysukvofwuth2bsuj5aahkdnpabscry7p7ljkgbxma.edgeql)
```

.. note::

>     Squashing is still limited to schema changes, so queries inside 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Squashing is limited to schema changes, so queries inside 
```

    data migrations will be discarded during a squash.

> EdgeDB Watch

Reviewer: I'm not sure how I feel about sorta "branding" the `edgedb watch` command by title casing it. I think I lean toward just referring to it as the command since it only ever exists in that context. If there were also an interface to it via the UI, I could see this making sense, but since it's exclusively that command, I'd lean toward just referring to it as a command.

Author: On the subject in general: I've seen EdgeDB Projects in a few areas but agreed that lowercasing is better.

Now with EdgeDB Watch there's a bit of a parsing annoyance for the reader as it's a verb, and also a persistent process that you can refer to.

* You will see EdgeDB watch quickly display
* If you are curious what is happening as EdgeDB watch does its thing, 
* EdgeDB watch will let you know
* EdgeDB watch is best run in a separate instance
* Then EdgeDB watch will suddenly pipe up
* those generated by EdgeDB watch will have a ``MigrationGeneratedBy.DevMode``
* Once you are satisfied with your changes while running EdgeDB watch
* that were made by EdgeDB watch.

A lot of them look for an instant like someone has mistyped "EdgeDB watches" or started typing watch and then opted for another verb.

So now I think I'm leaning towards keeping the capitalization, just because of how easy it is to refer to it and because otherwise you have to rewrite as either the command or "the process created by edgedb watch" (long) or "the process" (vague...what process was that again?).

Reviewer: I think I would prefer styling as inline code. It would help with the parsing issue but without having to "brand" the feature.

> You will see `edgedb watch` quickly display

> If you are curious what is happening as `edgedb watch` does its thing…

etc.

It might not work at the beginning of headings or inside links (due to RST quirks), but those instances are rare.
>

Author: Seems to work. There are only two capitalized instances left, one in the section title which is fine, and the CLI output which we are just faithfully passing on here. (Maybe small PR later on to change the output for the CLI but in the meantime that's what it shows)

https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/b50232905c2893ff990d23adc7b21e6ddfbdbaeb

============

Another option when quickly iterating over schema changes is ``edgedb watch``.
This will create a long-running process that keeps track of every time you

> save as ``.esdl`` file inside your ``/migrations`` folder, letting you know

Reviewer: ```suggestion
save an ``.esdl`` file inside your ``/migrations`` folder, letting you know
```

In addition to this suggestion, we may want to consider a broader rewrite.

> …letting you know if your changes have successfully compiled or not.

This almost seems like a side effect. Yes, it lets you know whether your changes successfully applied, but that's because it needed to let you know the outcome of applying them. Watching your schema files and _applying_ the changes seems like it's actually the important thing the command does. As a consequence, if it _can't_ apply them, it will let you know.

are stored as separate "dev mode" migrations, which are sort of like 
preliminary migrations that haven't been turned into a standalone 
migration script yet.

If you start with this schema:

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
      type User {
        name: str;
      }
    }

And then add a single property:

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
      type User {
        name: str;
        number: int32;
      }
    }

You will see EdgeDB Watch quickly display "calculating diff" before 
disappearing once the difference has been calculated and deemed to 
be good.

However, if you add incorrect syntax to the schema:

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
      type User {
        name: str;
        number: int32;
        wrong_property: i32; # Should say int32, not i32
      }
    }

Then EdgeDB Watch will suddenly pipe up and inform you that the schema 
can't be resolved:

.. code-block::

    error: type 'default::i32' does not exist
    ┌─ myproject/dbschema/default.esdl:5:25
    │
    5 │         wrong_property: i32;
    │                         ^^^ error

    Schema migration error:
    cannot proceed until .esdl files are fixed

> Once you correct the ``i32`` property to ``int32``, EdgeDB Watch will 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you correct the ``i32`` type to ``int32``, EdgeDB Watch will 
```

> let you know that things are okay now, and will become quiet again:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let you know that things are okay now and will resume quietly watching your schema and applying migrations:
```

.. code-block::

    Resolved. Schema is up to date now.

> EdgeDB Watch is best run in a separate tab on your command line so 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EdgeDB Watch is best run in a separate instance of your command line so 
```
to account for the fact not all terminal emulators/CLI interfaces support tabs

> that you can take care of other tasks—including officially migrating 
> when you are satisfied with your current schema—without having to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that you can take care of other tasks — including officially migrating 
when you are satisfied with your current schema — without having to 
```
This isn't more correct, but this is the way I've been trying to present em dashes so I'll replicate it here to be consistent.

stop the process.

If you are curious what is happening as EdgeDB Watch does its thing, 
try the following query after you have made some changes:

.. code-block::

    group schema::Migration {
        name,
        script
    } by .generated_by;

> Some migrations will contain nothing in their ``generated_by`` property, 

Reviewer: Add a brief sentence after the query telling what it does. Maybe something like this: "This will return a list of applied migrations."

Author: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/7c4494f93ec40c69bda1d94f6ec3eb072e1293a2

(A lowercased Edgedb watch slipped in there, reverted until we decide what to do with it)

while those generated by EdgeDB Watch will have a 
``MigrationGeneratedBy.DevMode``. 

> (The final option for ``generated_by`` is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(The final option aside from `DevMode` and the empty set for ``generated_by`` is
```
assuming these are, in fact, the other two 😅

``MigrationGeneratedBy.DDLStatement``, which will show up if you directly

> change your schema by using DDL - which is generally not recommended)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
change your schema by using DDL, which is generally not recommended)
```

> (The final option for ``generated_by`` is
> ``MigrationGeneratedBy.DDLStatement``, which will show up if you directly
> change your schema by using DDL - which is generally not recommended)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::

    The final option (aside from ``DevMode`` and the empty set) for ``generated_by`` is
    ``MigrationGeneratedBy.DDLStatement``, which will show up if you directly
    change your schema by using DDL, which is generally not recommended.
```

Once you are satisfied with your changes while running EdgeDB Watch, 
just create the migration with ``edgedb migration create`` and then 

> apply them with one small change: ``edgedb migrate --dev-mode`` to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apply them with one small tweak to the ``migrate`` command: ``edgedb migrate --dev-mode`` to 
```

let the CLI know to apply the migrations made during dev mode that 
were made by EdgeDB Watch.

> So you really want to use DDL
> =============================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, you really want to use DDL?
===============================
```

You might have a good reason to use a direct DDL statement or two 
to change your schema. How do you make that happen? EdgeDB disables 

> the usage of DDL by default, so this attempt to use DDL will not work:

Reviewer: DDL is only disabled after you run your first migration, right? If so, we should note that.

Author: Interesting! Did not know that. https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/f16ce487aae31069feda0574ec7da1af8aa117fa

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> create type MyType;
    error: QueryError: bare DDL statements are not 
    allowed in this database
    ┌─ <query>:1:1
    │
    1 │ create type MyType;
    │ ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ Use the migration commands instead.
    │
    = The `allow_bare_ddl` configuration variable is set to
    'NeverAllow'.  The `edgedb migrate` command normally sets
    this to avoid accidental schema changes outside of the 
    migration flow.

This configuration can be overridden by the following command which 

> changes the enum ``allow_bare_ddl``from the default ``NeverAllow`` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
changes the enum ``allow_bare_ddl`` from the default ``NeverAllow`` 
```

to the other option, ``AlwaysAllow``.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> configure current database set allow_bare_ddl := 'AlwaysAllow';

Note that the command is ``configure current database`` and not ``configure 
instance``, as ``allow_bare_ddl`` is evaluated on the database level.

That wasn't so bad, so why did the CLI tell us to try to "avoid accidental 

> schema changes outside of the migration flow"? Why is DDL disabled 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
schema changes outside of the migration flow?" Why is DDL disabled 
```

> by default in the first place?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
after running a migration in the first place?
```

> So you really wanted to use DDL but now regret it
> =================================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, you really wanted to use DDL but now regret it?
===================================================
```

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> \migration create
    Error executing command: Database must be updated to 
    the last migration on the filesystem for 
    `migration create`. Run:
    edgedb migrate

    db> \migrate
    Error executing command: database applied migration 
    history is ahead of migration history in 
    "myproject/dbschema/migrations" by 1 revision

Sneakily adding ``SomeType`` into your schema to match won't work 
either. The problem is that there *is* a migration already present, 
it just doesn't exist inside your ``/migrations`` folder. You can 
see it with the following query:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> select schema::Migration {*} 
    ...  filter 
    ...  .generated_by = schema::MigrationGeneratedBy.DDLStatement;
    {
    schema::Migration {
        id: 3882894a-8bb7-11ee-b009-ad814ec6a5f5,
        name: 'm1s6oniru3zqepiaxeljt7vcgyynxuwh4ki3zdfr4hfavjozsndfua',
        internal: false,
        builtin: false,
        computed_fields: [],
        script: 'SET generated_by := 
            (schema::MigrationGeneratedBy.DDLStatement);
    CREATE TYPE SomeType;',
        message: {},
        generated_by: DDLStatement,
    },
    }

> Fortunately, the fix is not too hard: we can use a command called 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately, the fix is not too hard: we can use the command
```

``edgedb migration extract``. This command will retrieve the migration(s) 
created using DDL and assign each of them a proper file name and hash 

> inside the ``/migrations`` folder, effectively giving them a proper 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
inside the ``/dbschema/migrations`` folder, effectively giving them a proper 
```

position inside the migration flow.

Note that at this point your ``.esdl`` schema will still not match 
the database schema, so if you were to type ``edgedb migration create`` 
the CLI would then ask you if you want to drop the type that you just 
created - because it doesn't exist inside there. So be sure to change 
your schema to match the schema inside the database that you have 
manually changed via DDL. If in doubt, use ``describe schema as sdl`` 
to compare or use ``edgedb migration create`` and check the output. 
If the CLI is asking you if you want to drop a type, that means that 
you forgot to add it to the schema inside your ``.esdl`` file(s).

Multiple migrations to keep data 
================================

> Let's say that we have a simple ``User`` type with a ``friends`` link 

Reviewer: We should either tell readers _not_ to follow along or give them instructions how they should. Do they migrate what they have, or start a new project?

Author: True that it should be more inviting: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/f4cea9899aa0da77125e002e770d8a9f3bd15f25

    db> update User set { 
    ...    friends := (select detached User filter User.name != .name)
    ...  };

Now what happens if we now want to change ``multi friends`` to an 
``array<str>``? If we were simply changing a scalar property to another 
property it would be easy, because EdgeDB would prompt us for a conversion 
expression. But a change from a link to a property is different:

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
      type User {
          name: str;
          multi friends: array<str>;
      }
    }

Doing a migration as such will just drop the ``friends`` link (along 
with its data) and create a new ``friends`` property - without any 
data at all.

To solve this problem, we can do two migrations instead of one. First 
we will keep the ``friends`` link, while adding a new property called 
``friend_names``:

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
      type User {
        name: str;
        multi friends: User;
        friend_names: array<str>;
      }
    }

The CLI will simply ask us if we created a property called ``friend_names``. 
We haven't applied the migration yet, so we might as well put the 

> data inside the same migration. A simple update will do the job!

Reviewer: We don't say how the reader should do this, and I think it would be better if we did. We should probably recommend `edgedb migration edit` for this to make sure the hash gets updated.

Author: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/f4cea9899aa0da77125e002e770d8a9f3bd15f25

    };

Now if we do a query we can confirm that the data inside ``.friends.name`` 
when converted to an array is indeed the same as the data inside the 
``friend_names`` property:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> select User { f:= array_agg(.friends.name), friend_names };
    {
    default::User {
      f: ['User 2', 'User 3'], 
      friend_names: ['User 2', 'User 3']
      },
    default::User {
      f: ['User 1', 'User 3'], 
      friend_names: ['User 1', 'User 3']
      },
    default::User {
      f: ['User 1', 'User 2'], 
      friend_names: ['User 1', 'User 2']
      },
    }

Or if we can't eyeball the data ourselves, we can use the ``all()`` 
function to ensure that this is the case:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> select all(array_agg(User.friends.name) = User.friend_names);
    {true}

Looks good! And now we can simply remove ``multi friends: User;`` 
from our schema and do a final migration.

Migration internals
===================

We've now reached the most optional part of the migrations tutorial, 
but an interesting one for those curious about what goes on behind 
the scenes during a migration.

> Migrations in EdgeDB before the advent of the EdgeDB Project flow 

Reviewer: Similar feedback here to earlier uses of "EdgeDB Watch" as if it were a term we wanted to establish as a brand. There exists a concept of a lower-case 'p' "project" in EdgeDB, and there is a command `edgedb project`. Not sure about "EdgeDB Project" though.
```suggestion
Migrations in EdgeDB before the advent of the ``edgedb project`` flow 
```

> were still automated, but required more manual work if you didn't 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
were still automated but required more manual work if you didn't 
```

want to accept all of the suggestions provided by the server. This 
process is in fact still used to migrate even today; the CLI just 
facilitates it by making it easy to respond to the generated suggestions.

> They took place `inside a transaction <transaction_>`_ handled by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pre-project migrations took place `inside a transaction <transaction_>`_ handled by 
```
I think you've said enough here between the pronoun and its antecedent to justify naming it again.

the user that essentially went like this: 

.. code-block::

    db> start migration to { <your schema goes here> };

This starts the migration, after which the quickest process was to 
type ``populate migration`` to accept the statements suggested by 
the server, and then ``commit migration`` to finish the process.

Now, there is another option besides simply typing ``populate migration`` 
that allows you to look at and handle the suggestions every step of 
the way (in the same way the CLI does today), and this is what we 

> are going to have some fun with. You can see `the original RFC <rfc_>`_ 
> for this if you are curious.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are going to have some fun with. You can see `the original migrations RFC <rfc_>`_ 
if you are curious.
```

It is *very* finicky compared to the CLI, resulting in a failed transaction 
if any step along the way is different from the expected behavior, 
but is an entertaining challenge to try to get right if you want to 
truly understand how migrations work in EdgeDB.

This process requires looking at the server's proposed solutions every 
step of the way, and these steps are best seen in JSON format. Let's 

> first set the CLI to make the format nicely readable with this command:

Reviewer: We should tell readers to start a new project before we get to this point if they want to follow along. (I assume that's the intention here anyway is for them to have a fresh project.)

Author: I don't want to give the impression that using the old method to migrate a schema requires a complete refresh of anything (the lesson to take home is that this is simply what happens unseen to the user every time the CLI does a migration for you), but you've reminded me that the reader won't know how to destroy and restart an instance when necessary. So added that here: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/986d069ef6db99e83f49cee35e1c90f1ac6234b2

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

>     db> \set output format json-pretty

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    db> \set output-format json-pretty
```

We will begin with the same simple schema used in the previous examples:

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
      type User {
        name: str;
      }
    }

And, as before, we will make a somewhat ambiguous change by changing 
``name`` to ``nam``.

.. code-block:: sdl

    module default {
      type User {
        nam: str;
      }
    }

Now we can start a migration by pasting this inside a ``start migration 
to {};`` block:

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db> start migration to {
    ...   module default {
    ...     type User {
    ...       name: str;
    ...     }
    ...   }
    ... };

You should get the output ``OK: START MIGRATION``, followed by a prompt 
that ends with ``[tx]`` to show that we are inside of a transaction. 
Anything we do here will have no effect on the current registered 
schema until we finally commit the migration.

> So now what do we do? We could simply type ``populate migration`` 

Reviewer: I think we've skipped a step here. The `describe migration` output suggests we have migrated to the new property name `nam`, but I don't think we've actually performed that migration yet. We need to first complete the initial migration and then start a new one with the new property name before we can get to this point.

Author: Ah, typo there. I've rephrased a bit while fixing it: https://github.com/edgedb/edgedb/pull/6656/commits/e6b19a539d1d3d1377d7203203d502ad39bd1300

to accept the server's suggested changes, but let's instead take a 
look at them one step at a time. To see the current described change, 
type ``describe current migration as json``. This will generate the 
following output:

.. code-block::

    {
    "parent": "m14opov4ymcbd34x7csurz3mu4u6sik3r7dosz32gist6kpayhdg4q",
    "complete": false,
    "proposed": {
    "prompt": "did you rename property 'name' of object type 'default::User'
        to 'nam'?",
    "data_safe": true,
    "prompt_id": "RenameProperty PROPERTY default::__|name@default|User 
        TO default::__|nam@default|User",
    "confidence": 0.67,
    "statements": [{"text": "ALTER TYPE default::User {\n    ALTER 
        PROPERTY name {\n        RENAME TO nam;\n    };\n};"}],
    "required_user_input": []
    },
    "confirmed": []
    }

The server is telling us with ``"complete": false`` that this suggestion 
is not the final step in the migration, that it is 67% confident that 
its suggestion is correct, and that we should probably type the following 
statement:

.. code-block::

    ALTER TYPE default::User { ALTER PROPERTY name { RENAME TO nam; };};

> Don't forget to remove the ``\n`` from inside the original suggestion 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't forget to remove the newlines (``\n``) from inside the original suggestion 
```

- the transaction will fail if you don't take them out. If the migration 
fails at any step you will see ``[tx]`` change to ``[tx:failed]`` 
and you will have to type ``abort migration`` to leave the transaction 
and begin the migration again.

Technically, at this point you are permitted to write any DDL statement 
you like and the migration tool will adapt its suggestions to reach 

> the desired schema. But this is more than likely to generate an error 
> when you try to commit the migration, and is bad practice in any case. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the desired schema. Doing so though is bad practice and is more than likely to generate an error 
when you try to commit the migration. 
```

> (But give it a try if you're curious)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Even so, give it a try if you're curious.)
```

> So let's dutifully type the suggested statement above, and then use 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's dutifully type the suggested statement above, and then use 
```

``describe current migration as json`` again to see what the current 
status of the migration is. This time we see two major differences: 
"complete" is now ``true``, meaning that we are at the end of the 
proposed migration, and "proposed" does not contain anything. We can 

> also see our confirmed statement(s) inside "confirmed" at the bottom.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also see our confirmed statement inside "confirmed" at the bottom.
```
since we're just talking about the case at hand here and not the generic case.

.. code-block::

    {
    "parent": "m1fgpuxbvd74m6pb72rdikakjv3fv7cftrez7r56qjgonboimp5zoa",
    "complete": true,
    "proposed": null,
    "confirmed": ["ALTER TYPE default::User {\n ALTER PROPERTY name 
    {\n RENAME TO nam;\n };\n};"]
    }

> With this done, you can type ``commit migration`` and the migration 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this done, you can commit the migration and the migration 
```

Lean toward referring to the action rather than the command here, both since you show the command below and since the command would actually require a semicolon which is a bit awkward to place inline in prose.

will be complete.

.. code-block:: edgeql-repl

    db[tx]> commit migration;
    OK: COMMIT MIGRATION

> And because this migration was created using direct DDL statements, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this migration was created using direct DDL statements, 
```

you will need to use ``edgedb migration extract`` to extract the latest
migration and give it a proper ``.edgeql`` file in the same way we 

> did above in the "So you really wanted to use DDL but now regret it"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
did above in the "So you really wanted to use DDL but now regret it?"
```
